How soon after surgery for epilepsy can a woman have a baby?	There are no set recommendations on when a woman would be able to conceive and have a baby after epilepsy surgery. In general, we would like to make sure that the surgery was able to control seizures (for this reason, we like to wait 6 to12 months after surgery), minimize the number of medications that the woman is taking (we prefer that no more than one medication is given), and that there have been no other surgical complications.
What tests are available to detect pancreatic cancer?	There are currently no simple tests for pancreatic cancer. Most cases are found when symptoms develop or an imaging study, such as a CT or MRI scan, is done for another reason. There is active research at Johns Hopkins that is aimed at developing a test for pancreatic cancer in the blood, urine and stool.
What is a physical therapist?	Physical therapists are licensed by the state, specializing in therapy programs for musculoskeletal injuries and disorders, sports injuries, post-operative rehabilitation, and massage therapy.
Will my child's immune system be weaker by relying on a vaccine?	No, the immune system makes antibodies against a germ, like the chickenpox virus, whether it encounters it naturally or is exposed to it through a vaccine. Being vaccinated against one disease does not weaken the immune response to another disease.
Is Greek yogurt healthier than regular yogurt?	Greek yogurt typically has more protein than regular yogurt (about 16 gm. versus 6 gm.), but it is not necessarily more healthy. No matter what type of yogurt you choose, look for one that is fat-free or at least low-fat and that is not loaded with sugar. Plain yogurt will obviously not have added sugar; and, typically, yogurts that are 100 calories or less for a 6 oz. container will be moderate in added sugar.
I am always tired. Why is this, and what can I do to change it?	Getting enough sleep is not to be underestimated. Unfortunately, given our busy lives with work and family and other obligations, many of us do not get enough sleep. Fortunately, there are behavior modifications that you can make, starting tonight, that will improve your ability to get a good night's sleep and feel less tired. We call this "sleep hygiene," and it includes the following behaviors: Trying to go to bed and wake up at the same time every night, regardless of whether it is a weekday or a weekend day. Avoiding caffeine at least after 6 pm, if not earlier. Limiting alcohol intake. Trying not to exercise at night just before sleep. Lying in bed awake: If you are in bed trying to sleep and are awake for more than 20 minutes, get up and out of bed; beds are for sleeping – not reading, eating, watching television, etc.
What causes Hashimoto's thyroiditis, and what is the best method of treatment? Can iodine help this condition?	Hashimoto's thyroiditis is a type of autoimmune thyroid disease in which the immune system attacks and changes the texture of the thyroid gland. Hashimoto's thyroiditis stops the gland from making enough thyroid hormones for the body to work the way it should. Therefore often people will need thyroid hormone replacement. Levothyroxine replacement (T4) is used to treat Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, although there are other formulations such as Armour thyroid (which contain both T3 and T4), which is also sometimes used. One should avoid taking iodine in this situation. If you have evidence of underactive thyroid and are symptomatic, the treatment of choice would be thyroid hormone replacement (T4 replacement).
Can you live without a pancreas?	Yes, you can live without a pancreas, but you will be diabetic, which means you will have to take insulin regularly. You will also need to take enzyme pills to help with the digestion of food.
What is a dental implant?	A dental implant is a small titanium fixture that replaces the root portion of a missing or natural tooth. The implant is placed in the upper or lower jaw and bonds with your bone. It also serves as an anchor for a crown, bridge or denture. Dental implants support crowns or dentures that look, feel, and function like natural teeth.
How long should medical records be stored?	Some states have specific guidelines that can be checked through your local board of medicine. The Doctors Company recommends the following: Adult patients, 10 years from the date the patient was last seen. Minor patients, 28 years from the patient's birth. Deceased patients, five years from the date of death (may vary by state).
If an adolescent (or an adult) is hit hard in the head, at what point should they go to the ER instead of just going to their primary care doctor?	Great question. If an athlete has any worrisome signs, such as prolonged loss of consciousness or focal neurological signs, or if he or she is getting worse, is not arousable, or has weakness or numbness that persists, he or she should probably be seen in the ER.
Is breast cancer inherited?	Most women who get breast cancer do not have any family history of breast cancer. Just because a family member had breast cancer does not always mean that you will get breast cancer. We do know that there are some genes associated with a known increased risk of breast cancer. These are BRCA 1 (breast cancer 1, early onset human tumor suppressor gene) and BRCA 2 (breast cancer type 2, susceptibility protein). Only 10 percent of women with breast cancer have these inherited genes. These women usually get breast cancer at a young age and have multiple family members with breast or ovarian cancer.
Which is better for covering up during a sunny day, light or dark clothes? Also, is there a danger from tanning sprays rather than tanning beds?	Light color clothing makes you feel cooler because it reflects most of the sun rays. However, dark colors actually absorb the sun rays and helps to prevent the ultraviolet (UV) radiation from getting to the skin underneath the clothing. Therefore, dark-colored clothes are more protective against the sun than light-colored clothing in areas that are covered, but are not protective for the skin that is not covered by the dark clothing. Sunscreen is still recommended for those uncovered areas.
How soon after a muscle strain or sprain can I begin exercising again?	For muscle sprain or strain, active exercise and stretching is typically necessary to help reduce pain and encourage healing. It is advisable to start stretching as soon as possible. For most back conditions, active exercise and stretching help reduce pain and encourage healing. A patient's back pain exercise program should be comprehensive, working the whole body with target to the back. The exercise program should include a combination of stretching, strengthening, and low-impact aerobic conditioning. Strengthening the core muscles will decrease the stress placed on the lower back. Walking definitely helps in conditioning the body.
How many acupuncture treatments does it take to relieve stress? Is this something that needs continual treatment?	There is an individual response to each treatment session. Typically, I would recommend a minimum of one session per week for five to eight treatments total until you reach a therapeutic effect and start to feel better. Often, patients will feel an immediate stress relief after one treatment session. The goal of additional treatments is to make that response long-lasting. You cannot control the external variables of stress. So, for some patients, they prefer to stick to a maintenance schedule of one session per month. Other patients will come in only during high peaks of stress and use acupuncture as a tool to help them through that high period of stress.
Why is it important that all children get vaccinated?	Unvaccinated children are capable of spreading the disease to other children, even those who have been vaccinated since no vaccine is 100% protective. In the U.S., vaccinations have decreased most vaccine-preventable childhood diseases by more than 95 percent (see www.immunize.org/catg.d/p4037.pdf for examples). Vaccines have minimized or eliminated outbreaks of certain diseases that were once lethal to large numbers of people, including measles and polio in the U.S. and smallpox worldwide. But because the bacteria and viruses that cause diseases still exist, the public health gains achieved through vaccines can only be maintained by ensuring that vaccination rates remain high enough to prevent outbreaks. Vaccines are effective not only because they protect individuals who have been vaccinated but also because they confer a broader protection for communities by establishing "community immunity." When a sufficiently high proportion of a population is vaccinated against infectious diseases, the entire population can obtain protection. Community immunity is critical for protecting the health of many groups of people who are especially vulnerable to communicable diseases: those who cannot be vaccinated, either because they are too young or because a medical condition makes vaccination too risky.
Why do kids who are healthy, active, and eating well need to be immunized?	Vaccinations are intended to help keep healthy kids healthy. Because vaccines work by protecting the body before disease strikes, if you wait until your child gets sick, it will be too late for the vaccine to work. The best time to immunize kids is when they're healthy.
What is chronic sinusitis?	Chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS) is a poorly understood inflammatory condition affecting the sinuses. We are unsure of what exactly causes CRS. It is characterized by waxing and waning symptoms, including nasal drainage or post nasal drip, changes in smell, nasal congestion, facial pressure or pain, ear fullness, cough, and fatigue. The clinical diagnosis of CRS is usually made based on the time course of the disease (symptoms present for more than three months) plus some combination of signs and symptoms, CT scan results, and an endoscopic nasal examination.
What if my baby has a cold or fever, or is taking antibiotics? Can he or she still get vaccinated?	Yes. Your child can still get vaccinated if he or she has a mild illness, a low-grade fever, or is taking antibiotics. Talk with your child’s healthcare provider if you have questions.
I have lost 20 lbs., but I am afraid that I will gain it back like I always do. Is there anything I can do to help keep this weight off for good?	The National Weight Control Registry has been used to identify what factors help maintain a weight loss. The participants in the ongoing registry have lost a minimum of 30 lbs. and have maintained it for a year. Certain behaviors have been identified that are associated with weight maintenance. Some of these include: 45+ minutes of exercise most days of the week; following a low-fat, calorie-controlled plan; eating similarly to your regular eating plan on special occasions such as holidays/vacations; self-monitoring such as weighing yourself regularly; keeping a food diary; and support from others.
Is there a genetic factor to strokes?	Yes. There are genetic factors. There are some people that are born with certain genes that predispose them to stroke. One such condition would be CADASIL (cerebral autosomal-dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy). If you are interested, I am sure you can learn more about this condition from the Web. Some people are born with genetic conditions that predispose them to clotting. This in turn may increase their stroke risk. Finally, if you have a strong family history of high blood pressure, diabetes, high cholesterol or any of the major modifiable risk factors for stroke, you may also be at higher risk because of this. However, these particular conditions are very much treatable and you certainly can do something about them to lower your risk.
Where can adults get vaccinated?	Check with your clinic to see if they administer vaccines. Additionally, your local health department or local hospital may administer influenza, pneumococcal, hepatitis A, hepatitis B, and Tdap vaccines. Many pharmacies offer these and other immunizations. Clinics may also be available in shopping malls, grocery stores, senior centers, and other community settings.
How many times do I need to bring my baby in for vaccinations?	At least five visits are needed before age two, but the visits can be timed to coincide with well-child check-ups. Your baby should get the first vaccine (hepatitis B) at birth, while still in the hospital. Multiple visits during the first two years are necessary because there are 14 diseases your baby can be protected against, and most require two or more doses of vaccine for the best protection.
Is pancreatic cancer a genetic disease?	Pancreatic cancer can be genetic, but the vast majority of pancreatic cancer is sporadic. Many genes play a role in the growth of pancreatic cancer. The four major driver genes include KRAS, P53, P16 and SMAD4.
Does day care, preschool, etc. have an effect on children developing allergies or asthma?	Yes, it does. Most children in day care or preschool settings experience more viral respiratory infections in the first two to three years of life than children who are at home with no siblings. If you control for genetic background and environmental triggers, however, the children who attended day care/preschool had a lower incidence of asthma later in life.
What diseases do vaccines protect against?	Immunizing your baby with vaccines protects against serious diseases like measles, whooping cough, polio, tetanus, rotavirus, hepatitis A, hepatitis B, chickenpox, influenza, and more.
What is a resident?	A resident is someone who has completed his or her education to be a medical doctor. Many people mistakenly believe that a resident is a medical student. This is not the case. Residents are not medical students. They are doctors who are licensed to practice in New York State. Though residents are doctors, they are not yet board-certified in internal medicine and they practice under the supervision of a board-certified physician.
What is tendonitis?	Tendonitis, medically spelled tendinitis, is an inflammation or irritation of a tendon. Chronic strain, overuse or misuse of a tendon leading to a repetitive stress injury, or a serious acute injury can lead to a weakness, tear, or swelling of the tendon tissue, resulting in pain and stiffness near the tendon. Tendonitis usually occurs in the elbow, hip, knee, shoulder, thumb and wrist, but can occur in any tendon.
Should I be taking calcium pills? There are so many types - which are best?	Women should take in 1,000 mg of calcium in their daily diet. If there is a strong family history of osteoporosis or osteoporosis has already been diagnosed, a woman should take 1,500 mg of calcium daily. A small daily supplement of vitamin D (400 IU) is recommended because it improves the absorption of calcium by the body. Either calcium carbonate tablets or calcium citrate tablets may be taken four to six times a day up to 1,000 to 1,500 mg total. Calcium citrate is absorbed better by some patients and may have fewer digestive track side effects. Men with osteoporosis are usually given calcium supplements of between 1 and 1.5 grams a day. When there are signs of reduced calcium absorption, supplements can be increased up to three grams a day, and vitamin D supplements of 50,000 IU may be given once or twice a week. However, at dosage levels this high calcium levels should be closely monitored.
Will I always see my own doctor?	When you have an appointment scheduled with your own doctor, that is who you will see. If you need to schedule an appointment urgently and your doctor is not available, we may ask if you would like to be seen by another doctor or a nurse practitioner. This often makes it possible for you to be seen sooner.
What are the lungs?	The lungs are a pair of organs that your body uses to breathe. They are found inside your chest. The lungs bring fresh oxygen into your body and push carbon dioxide out of your body.
Can pituitary tumors be prevented through diet and exercise?	No, these tumors are caused by an abnormality in the genetic material of the pituitary cell, which causes the cells to continue growing and dividing.
What are the chances of a pancreatic cyst becoming cancerous?	Pancreatic cysts are very common, and the majority are not cancerous, but some may be, and others may be precancerous. There are several different types of pancreatic cysts ranging from benign to malignant. The key is to determine the malignant risk of your specific cyst.
Can I meet my pediatrician before my baby is born?	Yes, in fact we strongly encourage parents-to-be to visit our office for a prenatal appointment. This is a great way to get acquainted with our office and our doctors. During this visit, we will answer any questions that you have about our practice or your new child. Visit our expectant parent's page for more information.
What is orthopedics?	Orthopedics (alternatively, orthopaedics) is a medical specialty focused on the diagnosis and treatment of conditions, disorders, and injuries of the muscles, bones, joints, tendons, ligaments, and nerves. A doctor who specializes in this medical specialty is called an orthopedic (alternatively, orthopaedic) surgeon or orthopedist.
Do I use ice on my injury? Do I use heat on my injury?	The general rule of thumb is to use ice in the acute stage of an injury (within the first 24 – 48 hours) or whenever swelling is showing. Ice helps to reduce inflammation and swelling by decreasing blood flow to the area that is injured. The general guideline is to apply ice indirectly (not directly on the skin) for 20 minutes, remove the ice for at least 20 minutes, and repeat as necessary. Heat is used to increase blood flow, which helps promote pain relief after inflammation and swelling subside. Heat is also used to assist in warming muscles up prior to exercise, any physical activity, or physical therapy
How do I know when to take my baby in for vaccinations?	Your healthcare provider should let you know when the next doses are due. For infants most vaccinations are given on a 2, 4 and 6 month schedule. If you are not sure, call your healthcare provider’s office to find out when your child should return for vaccinations. Doses cannot be given too close together or immunity doesn’t have time to build up. On the other hand, you don’t want to delay your child’s vaccinations and get behind schedule because during this time, your child remains unprotected against these serious diseases.
Do pituitary tumors spread to other parts of the body, like so many other tumors?	No, pituitary tumors are usually benign. They grow very slowly and do not spread to other parts of the body.
Are there any vitamins or supplements to help vision?	The only truly scientific evidence says there are specific antioxidants and minerals that slow the progression in a large percentage of people who are at "high risk" for macular degeneration. Otherwise, all suggestions for vitamins are anecdotal. It is certainly true that vitamin deficiencies can have a negative effect on vision. So it is probably a good idea to take a regular multivitamin on a daily basis if you think you don't get full nutrition through your diet.
What alternative therapies can be used to treat migraine?	The most common non-medical treatment for headache is relaxation training. Many studies have demonstrated that relaxation training is equally as effective for treatment of migraine as medications. This training takes more time and effort than using a medication, but once learned, it is free, can be used whenever the patient wishes, and has no negative side effects. Exercise has been shown to reduce headache risk and psychotherapy often helps patients learn to identify and manage headache-triggering emotional stress.
Do immunizations or thimerosal cause autism?	No. Numerous studies have found no link between vaccines and autism (a developmental disorder that's characterized by mild to severe impairment of communication and social interaction skills). Likewise, a groundbreaking 2004 report from the Institute of Medicine (IOM) found that thimerosal (an organic mercury compound that's been used as a preservative in vaccines since the 1930s) does not cause autism.
Am I required to sign off on my documentation?	Each provider is ultimately responsible for his or her medical record documentation, regardless of its origin—from dictation, a scribe, or an electronic entry. Therefore, providers should confirm review by signing off on all documentation.
What causes acne?	The exact cause of acne is not known, but one important factor is an increase in hormones called androgens. These male sex hormones increase in both boys and girls during puberty. Some things that can make acne worse include friction caused by leaning on or rubbing the skin, harsh scrubbing, picking or squeezing blemishes, and emotional stress. Acne is not caused by chocolate or other kinds of foods.
Do childhood earaches cause hearing loss later in life?	Recurrent ear infections during childhood can sometimes lead to chronic hearing loss. If an infection is suspected, the child should be seen by a physician for appropriate treatment.
What are the signs of osteoporosis?	Some people with osteoporosis experience no symptoms at all, while others may experience pain in the bones and muscles, particularly of the back. A person may experience fractures or broken bones (particularly of the hip and wrist) with very little to cause them. Some people develop humps in their upper back or experience shrinking height because of compression fractures in their backs. When symptoms are experienced, a person may have pain that comes on suddenly, does not radiate, gets worse when weight is put on the area, may be tender locally and generally begins to go away in a week. However, some pain may remain for three months or more.
What is cartilage?	Cartilage is a soft, rubbery, gel-like coating on the ends of bones, where they articulate, that protects joints and facilitates movement.
Why does my child need to receive vaccinations?	Immunizations are a series of shots given to children at different ages to help ward off serious, and potentially fatal.
How can skin problems be diagnosed?	Doctors can diagnose many skin problems by discussing the symptoms and examining the skin. Sometimes, additional testing may be necessary. A variety of skin tests are available to help diagnose skin problems such as bacterial, viral, or fungal skin infections. A skin biopsy can be performed to tell the difference between rashes, malignant (cancerous) cells, and benign (noncancerous) growths.
What if I miss an appointment? Does my baby have to start the vaccines all over again?	No. If your baby misses some doses, it’s not necessary to start over. Your provider will continue from where he or she left off.
Can a vegan diet cause lupus patient to go into remission?	The scientific evidence on the role of diet in autoimmune diseases such as lupus is just becoming available. I am a believer that a plant-based diet is helpful in promoting overall health and decreasing the chemicals that cause inflammation. I advocate a plant-based diet along with a very low-fat diet. You have to recall that French fries are vegan but they are not exactly healthy. I think that exercise and healthy diet are extremely important for everyone, but more so for those with autoimmune diseases.
What are the causes of lung cancer?	Lung cancer is most commonly caused by smoking or being around other people who are smoking. Cigarette smoke includes dangerous substances that can change the cells inside your lungs. The more you smoke or are exposed to second-hand smoke, the higher your risk of developing lung cancer. While smoke is the cause of most lung cancer, people who have never smoked or been around smoking can develop lung cancer too. Occasionally, lung cancer does not have a clear cause.
How do I keep track of my baby’s vaccinations?	In many medical practices, your child’s immunization record is entered into an electronic record-keeping system. It’s important that you keep home records too, so be sure to ask for a personal record card or a printed copy of your child’s vaccinations. If you don’t receive it, be sure to ask. Bring your copy of the record to all medical appointments. Whenever your child receives a vaccine, make sure your copy gets updated. Your child will benefit by having an accurate vaccination record throughout his or her life.
What, exactly, are high-profile breast implants?	High-profile implants can allow you to have more volume in a narrower width. Like implant volume, this decision is based on your anatomy. If a woman chooses a 350 cc [implant size], a high-profile implant will offer a lot of projection, but if she is too broad in the chest, the implant will not be wide enough. A skilled surgeon can guide these decisions and make sure you get the desired aesthetic result.
What are the rates of lung cancer?	Approximately 6.5 percent of men and women will be diagnosed with lung or bronchus cancer at some point during their life based on 2011-2013 data from the National Institutes of Health.
What is osteoporosis?	Osteoporosis is a condition in which bones gradually become thin and lose mass. This causes the bones to become frail and break more easily. Osteoporosis is the most common bone disease in America, affecting about 10 million people.
If you are diagnosed with “pre-diabetes,” can you eat right and exercise enough for it to go away?	The diagnosis of pre-diabetes is a risk factor for developing diabetes, not an absolute certainty. So, yes, diet and exercise can normalize blood sugars and reduce your future risk of developing diabetes.
How are pituitary tumors treated?	Some pituitary tumors can be controlled with medication. Others may require surgery of radiotherapy.
Do calories from hard liquor add just as much caloric energy/fat as calories from other sources? What are "empty calories" so many people refer to?	Excellent question. To make a long story short: A serving of alcohol is typically not very high in calories, BUT it is metabolized very differently than our food (90 percent in the liver), which can make weight loss tricky. For example, a light beer is roughly 100 calories and so is a handful of nuts. In terms of calories, this is not much at all, but in terms of metabolism, they vary significantly, partly because you have fiber, protein, and fat in the nut and virtually none of these in beer.This is why we can't say a calorie equals a calorie. Think of it this way, an empty calorie food or drink is something you can remove from the diet but still maintain optimal physiological function. Do our bodies need alcohol to survive? No. Candy? No. Soda? No. These are empty calories because they don't have a purpose. Do we need lean protein to survive? Yes. Fresh produce? Yes. You get the idea...
What is a Pediatrician?	A pediatrician is a medical doctor who specializes in the care of children. Pediatricians have undergone special training in the health and illnesses of infants, teens and young adults, and the majority of pediatricians are certified by the American Board of Pediatrics after passing a comprehensive exam. Pediatricians provide preventive health care for children in good health and medical care for children who are acutely or chronically ill. They also provide parents with support and advice with issues such as growth and development, safety and prevention, nutrition, and emotional wellness to foster a lifetime of good health.
How effectively can "appliances" be used to control snoring (i.e., nasal strips or that plastic thing that dilates nostrils to open nasal passages)?	The right appliance may be very helpful, but this will vary from person to person. If weakness of the nasal cartilage is a problem, for instance, nasal strips may be helpful. An evaluation by an ENT could help determine your specific sites of airway obstruction and the most appropriate treatment options.
Why is skin important?	Skin is the body's largest organ. It regulates body temperature, protects against injury, and prevents infection. The skin contains nerves that sense cold, heat, pain, pressure, and touch.
What are the layers of the skin?	The skin consists of a thin outer layer (epidermis), a thicker middle layer (dermis), and the deeper layer (subcutaneous tissue or hypodermis).
What resources are available for state regulations of practice?	Some states have specific guidelines that may be checked through your local board of medicine, state medical society, or the Medical Group Management Association (MGMA), or you can contact your patient safety risk manager at The Doctors Company.
I thought vaccines were just for babies, do adults really need to get vaccinated?	Vaccination is as important for adults as it is for children, and yet many adults are not optimally vaccinated. Adults need vaccines because vaccine immunity (protection) may have diminished over time and a person will need a booster shot to enhance protection. For some diseases like whooping cough, adults who are vaccinated prevent the spread of disease and in turn protect children. There are also vaccines, such as the shingles vaccine, that protect against diseases/conditions that develop in adults.
My teenage girls want to use nail polish, but I have heard that many nail polishes contain formaldehyde and can cause cancer. Is it safe for my daughters to use it?	Formaldehyde is associated with increased cancer risk. Many nail polishes do contain formaldehyde. Individuals who work in the nail salon business may have an increased risk of cancer because of their exposure; however, it is not clear that an individual's use of nail polish will increase cancer risk. There are formaldehyde-free nail polishes.
My son is entering middle school in the fall. What advice can I give him if he finds himself on the receiving end of cyberbullying?	It is great that you're already thinking about what to do before he is even entering school. Parent and child discussions are key. Make sure he is comfortable in coming to you or a trusted adult, such as a teacher, if he is being bullied or feels threatened. Before he is permitted access to social media sites, such as Twitter or Facebook, know how to block inappropriate messages and behavior. You should know how to access blocking capabilities and have access to controls on his cell phone. If he does receive a threatening message, be sure he does not respond.
I’m traveling abroad, what vaccinations do I need?	Contact your doctor or your local health department as early as possible to find out which immunizations you may need. Vaccines against certain diseases, such as hepatitis A, hepatitis B, yellow fever, and typhoid fever, are recommended for different countries. The time required to receive all immunizations will depend on whether you need one shot or a series of shots. You can also visit the CDC's Travelers' Health Website for up-to-date information on immunization recommendations for international travelers.
What causes GERD?	There is no known single cause of GERD. Reflux occurs when the muscle barrier between the stomach and the esophagus does not work as it should or is somehow overwhelmed.
How is GERD treated?	Treatment of GERD is long-term. The goals are to control or reduce symptoms, heal an injured esophagus, and manage or prevent complications.
My mother has trouble walking, but she refuses to get a walker or cane. I worry about her. How can I convince her to get some sort of walking aid?	We run into this situation at least two or three times a week in clinic. Sometimes, it is best to bring the parent in so he or she can hear the message from a non-family member. In this situation, I usually "soft-sell" a rollator walker. I emphasize that this is an exercise device that allows them to walk quickly and increase their distances, otherwise the legs get weaker and weaker. Offer the older patient the option of using the rollator walker in private, not out in public. Also, emphasize that the patient does not become "dependent" on the walker. It is no different than going to the grocery store and using the cart. This strengthens the legs!
What do vaccines do?	Vaccines work by preparing the body to fight illness. Each contains either a dead or a weakened germ (or parts of it) that causes a particular disease. The body practices fighting the disease by making antibodies that recognize specific parts of that germ. This permanent or longstanding response means that if someone is ever exposed to the actual disease, the antibodies are already in place and the body knows how to combat it and the person doesn't get sick. This is called immunity.
What is a medical student?	A medical student is someone who is currently attending medical school and is not yet a doctor. Medical students are not able to diagnose or treat patients on their own.
My physician is a faculty member—what does that mean?	Since the Division of General Medicine and Strong Internal Medicine are part of an academic medical center—the University of Rochester Medical Center—our doctors are all faculty members. In other words, they are professors at URMC. As a result, our faculty members are all highly accomplished doctors who are among the best in the field of internal medicine.
How do I get a prescription refilled?	To have a prescription refilled, please have your pharmacy fax a refill request to us at (585) 276-2684.
How do I know if I have colon cancer?	The only way to definitively know if you have colon cancer is to be evaluated for it. There are many different ways of screening for colon cancer. Colonoscopy is considered the standard because it not only can detect cancer and precancerous polyps, it can also serve as a way to biopsy the abnormal tissue for diagnosis. In some cases, the doctor can completely remove the polyps before they become cancer. You should have a discussion with your physician to see if and when you should undergo a colonoscopy. Oftentimes, colon cancer or precancerous polyps do not produce any symptoms. In other words, there is nothing that suggests they are there. That is one of the reasons colonoscopy is so important as a screening tool. Sometimes, patients will have symptoms that could be caused by colon cancer, such as a change in bowel habits (for example, new onset of constipation or need to strain, diarrhea, and/or thinning of the caliber of stools), crampy abdominal pain, or bleeding from the anus with or without bowel movements. These symptoms should be evaluated by a physician who can determine if you need a colonoscopy.
Is there a direct correlation between breast cancer and pancreatic cancer?	There is a relationship between BRCA mutations (breast and ovarian cancer) and pancreatic cancer. A BRCA mutation approximately doubles the lifetime risk of developing pancreatic cancer. Around 5 percent of people with pancreatic cancer have a BRCA mutation. However, breast cancer is very common, so not all patients with breast cancer are thought to have an increased risk of pancreatic cancer.
What is an academic medical center?	An academic medical center is a place that does three things: provides clinical care for patients, performs research on disease, and educates new doctors. The General Medicine Division and Strong Internal Medicine are both part of an academic medical center, the University of Rochester Medical Center (URMC). This is a great advantage to us, because it allows us to work closely with top specialists from every area of patient care. The constant feedback we get from URMC specialists helps us to know about the latest advances in every field of patient care.
Artificial insemination success rates seem very low. How can they be increased?	First, we have to put things in perspective. The monthly pregnancy rate in the fertile population is only about 20%. The monthly pregnancy rate with unexplained infertility is 2% to 3%. Treatment with artificial intrauterine insemination (IUI) alone is of little benefit. Combining IUI with an oral fertility drug, such as Clomid® (clomiphene) or Femara® (letrozole) yields about a 10% pregnancy rate per cycle. This is typically tried for up to six cycles, at which time we may continue the IUIs, substituting the more potent injectable fertility drugs for pregnancy rates of up to 20% per treatment cycle, ie, back to the normal baseline rate. This is usually tried up to three cycles before moving on to IVF.
What is a ligament?	A ligament is an elastic band of tissue that connects bone to bone and provides stability to the joint.
Can pancreatic cancer be prevented?	Unfortunately, most pancreatic cancer cannot be prevented, but you can reduce your risk by maintaining a healthy weight, stopping smoking and limiting your alcohol intake. Other risk factors include chronic pancreatitis and family history. Occasionally, precancerous lesions can be identified and, if removed early, can prevent pancreatic cancer from developing.
What is GERD?	Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) is a condition where stomach contents flow back (reflux) into the esophagus (food tube) causing troublesome symptoms and/or possible damage to the esophagus. GERD is a chronic disease for which long-term medical therapy is usually effective
Do vaccines have side effects?	Vaccines are among the safest medicines available. Some common side effects are a sore arm or fever. There is a very small risk that a serious problems could occur after getting a vaccine. However, the potential risks from the diseases vaccines prevent are much greater than the potential risks associated with the vaccines themselves.
Does everybody get osteoporosis as they get older?	Not everyone gets osteoporosis, but as we age, it is more likely that we will experience some osteoporosis. Besides age and gender, certain things will make osteoporosis more likely, including: A family history of osteoporosis. Being less active. Not taking in enough calcium, phosphorus and vitamin D. Having your first period late and menopause early. Not bearing children. Drinking coffee or alcohol and smoking. Being Caucasian or Asian (Blacks and Hispanics have a higher bone mass than do Caucasians or Asians)
What is evidence-based medicine?	“Evidence-based medicine” means medical care that is up-to-date with the most current recommendations. Medical research is constantly discovering new ways to identify, prevent, and treat illness. We pride ourselves on being aware of that research so we can provide our patients with the most effective medical care.
What are the signs and symptoms of GERD?	The most common symptom of GERD is heartburn. Another typical symptom is reflux of fluid into the mouth. Some of the other less common symptoms may include difficulty or pain when swallowing, sensation of food sticking in the esophagus, hoarseness, throat-clearing, chronic sore throat, wheezing, or chronic cough.
Are there better ways to protect my baby against these diseases?	No. Breastfeeding offers temporary immunity against some minor infections like colds, but it is not an effective means of protecting a child from the specific diseases prevented by vaccines. Likewise, vitamins won’t protect against the bacteria and viruses that cause these serious diseases. Chiropractic remedies, naturopathy, and homeopathy are totally ineffective in preventing vaccine-preventable diseases. Some parents think that getting the "natural" disease is preferable to "artificial" vaccination, leading to a "natural" immunity. Some even arrange chickenpox "parties" to ensure their child gets infected. It’s true that for some diseases, getting infected will lead to immunity, but the price paid for natural disease can include paralysis, brain injury, liver cancer, deafness, blindness, or even death. When you consider the seriousness of these risks, vaccination is definitely the better choice.
What if I can’t afford to get my child vaccinated?	Your child’s health depends on timely vaccinations. Vaccinations are free or low cost for children when families can’t afford them through the Vaccines for Children (VFC) program. Call your healthcare provider or local/state health department to find out where to go for affordable vaccinations. You can find a contact for your state's VFC program on your state's website. A listing of state immunization program websites is available at www.vaccineinformation.org/state-immunization-programs/
Are there any long-term effects associated with taking ADHD (attention deficit hyperactivity disorder) medications? If so, what are they and what medications are implicated?	Many parents are concerned about the long-term effects of taking medicines. One of the best sources of information for this question is the Multimodal Treatment Study of ADHD (MTA). This study was a very large study of the treatments typically associated with ADHD, pharmacotherapy, behavioral intervention, and their combination. Evidence regarding the side effects of using stimulant treatment for ADHD shows that long-term use of medicine may decrease stature. However, in children who have continued use of medicine with generally higher doses of methylphenidate, stature differences remain relatively small. The use of stimulants to treat ADHD both in the short-term and long-term is considered safe by most of the major medical organizations, including the American Medical Association and the American Psychiatric Association.
What is a Patient Centered Medical Home?	A Patient Centered Medical Home is a model of healthcare delivery in which care is tailored to the needs and preferences of patients. The Patient Centered Medical Home model encourages active engagement of patients and families with shared decision making and practice improvement. Our goal is to provide strong provider-patient relationships, seamless care coordination, and improved access to care, all of which will result in the highest quality of medical treatment. Strong Internal Medicine achieved recognition as a Level 3 Patient Centered Medical Home in February 2015 by the National Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA).
What is a tendon?	A tendon is a band of tissue that connects muscle to bone.
How is osteoporosis prevented?	Preventing osteoporosis starts early in life with a good diet rich in calcium and vitamin D. Frequent exercise also plays an important role since It increases bone strength and makes patients less likely to experience fractures or breaks. After menopause, some women may take estrogen supplements to help keep bones strong. Persons at risk for osteoporosis should be checked regularly by a doctor. When the disorder is discovered early through bone scans and X-rays, the doctor can suggest changes in diet, exercise and medications to keep bones healthy. Unfortunately, when osteoporosis is discovered as a result of a broken or fractured bone, it is too late to take preventive action.
What causes osteoporosis?	The body is constantly replacing old bone with new bone, just like growing new hair and skin. Osteoporosis occurs when the body does not make enough new bone to replace the old, or old bone is lost too fast for the body to replace it. A number of factors cause bones to begin thinning and become frail. As women become menopausal, they make less estrogen, the female hormone that helps keep bones strong. Other causes of osteoporosis may be a diet low in calcium or vitamin D, heavy steroid use and alcoholism.
Is there an increased risk of migraine for women who choose to take estrogen for menopausal symptoms?	Yes, possibly. Women with a history of migraine who take estrogen (i.e. birth control pills or hormone therapy) may experience a worsening of their migraine. Headache can be one of the more common side effects from estrogen containing medications.
Can you get an STI from oral sex if one person has a fever blister? Also, if a person has an STI, is oral sex still OK?	Yes. STIs [sexually transmitted infections], including herpes, gonorrhea, chlamydia, and hepatitis may be transmitted orally during oral/anal sex. If there are blisters, ulcers, or any lesions present, you should abstain from this activity.
How is periodontal disease treated?	Periodontal disease may be treated through scaling and root planning. Periodontal surgery may be needed, and sometimes bone grafting can be done to regenerate some of the lost supporting tissues.
What is a nurse practitioner?	A nurse practitioner is a registered nurse (RN) who has completed additional nursing education and training in diagnosing and managing common as well as complex conditions. Because of their advanced training, Nurse Practitioners are fully qualified to perform many of the tasks of a physician, including the performance of physical examinations, treating illnesses and prescribing medications. Nurse practitioners have a particular focus on prevention, wellness and patient education.
Why is pancreatic cancer usually found in the later stages?	Pancreatic cancer usually does not cause symptoms, so approximately 50 percent of pancreatic cancers will not be identified until they have already metastasized (spread to other parts of the body).
What is an occupational therapist?	Occupational therapists are licensed by the state and specialize in the treatment of the upper extremity and work injuries. The services provided by occupational therapists include patient education, joint range of motion, adaptive techniques, splinting, and workplace evaluations.
Can drinking water with lemon prevent kidney stones? Also, I have been told not to drink city water. What is the best water to drink?	One-half cup of lemon juice concentrate added to drinking water over the course of the day is a preventive therapy for calcium oxalate stone formation. As for city water, it is safe to drink but the concern is with water softened using a sodium ion exchange. Softened water should not be used for cooking, drinking, or for ice dispensers.
Do afternoon naps for one hour or so help or disturb sleep later on at night?	There are two processes in the brain that create sleep drive in general. The first is the body's clock. It creates sleepiness between 3 a.m. and 5 a.m. and a little bit also in the afternoon; and it paradoxically creates wakefulness at around 8 p.m., during a time called 'the forbidden zone of sleep.' The second process relates more directly to your question. It is called “Process S,” where the “S” stands for 'sleep.' This is a process where the longer you stay awake, the more likely you are to go to the deeper stages of sleep when you go to sleep. We think it is driven by the build-up of adenosine in the brain over time. Caffeine antagonizes adenosine. Now, if you take a nap, the brain gets rid of adenosine at its site of action rather quickly. So, if you take a nap, you are indeed less likely to be able to go to sleep as successfully at bedtime. However, this isn't the only thing driving you to sleep when you go to bed at night. We ask our insomnia patients not to nap because we want to keep as much of Process S going as we can. But we also have to think about the clock aspects of sleep. Both are involved in whether a person sleeps at a particular time.
How do I know if I have GERD?	Only a doctor can make a diagnosis of GERD. Talk to your doctor if: Your heartburn happens 2 or more times a week. Your heartburn gets worse. Your heartburn wakes you from sleep at night. You’ve had heartburn now and then for several years. You have difficulty or pain when swallowing. Your discomfort interferes with daily activities. GERD can usually be diagnosed based on the signs and symptoms. Tests may be done to confirm or exclude a GERD diagnosis.
What does pelvic floor rehab therapy involve? Does it help with painful intercourse?	Pelvic floor rehab is an exciting, relatively new field. It is used for a variety of conditions and has been particularly helpful for situations involving pelvic pain and painful intercourse. Typically, the pelvic floor therapist will place (painless) monitoring electrodes on different muscle groups of the vagina, demonstrate to the woman the various muscle group contractions, and help her learn how to exercise those groups of muscle. These exercises can increase or decrease muscle tone, depending on what is needed. Many women experience good results with these programs.
Do vaccines cause SIDS, multiple sclerosis, or other problems?	There are concerns, many of which circulate on the Internet, linking some vaccines to multiple sclerosis, sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS), and other problems. To date, studies have failed to show any connection between immunizations and these conditions. The number of SIDS cases has actually fallen by more than 50% in recent years, whereas the number of vaccines given yearly has continued to rise.
What is bursitis?	Bursitis is an inflammation or irritation of a bursa, which is a fluid-filled sac located around joints. Bursitis causes a reduction in or a loss of motion at the affected joint. Bursitis typically occurs in the heel, hip, knee, shoulder, and thumb. 
I am trying to eat a vegetarian diet. How can I get the protein that I need?	It is good that you are concerned because many people who start eating a vegetarian diet simply eliminate the meat from their diet and compromise their protein needs. Rich protein sources include lentils, legumes, nuts/seeds, soy products (such as tofu or soy meat substitutes), eggs, and dairy products. You need to be intentional about consuming these foods several times throughout the day.
Is it normal for young children to stop taking or needing naps? My 3½-year-old hasn’t taken a nap in quite a while, but seems to do OK.	We often read many books as parents, and we hope that our children fall into the molds that are described. This rarely happens. All biological phenomena (normal height, normal weight, normal blood pressure, etc.) are best described as ranges of normal rather that any one particular number. There are many normal people who are short sleepers, just as there are some people who are long sleepers. We recognize them, just as you do your child, by the fact that they seem to behave normally when they get their quota of sleep. I would not consider your child abnormal and would also let you know that there are some first graders who still need a nap.
What should I do if I need to cancel an appointment?	If you need to cancel an appointment, please call us at (585) 275-7424.
Is osteoporosis something only women need to worry about?	Both men and women can get osteoporosis. In fact, a rare form of osteoporosis can occur in children and young adults of both genders. Postmenopausal osteoporosis tends to occur between the ages of 51 and 75. Although osteoporosis is six times more common in women, it can also occur in men with low levels of testosterone. Another type of osteoporosis is associated with the normal aging process. It usually occurs in people who are 60 or older, and it is twice as common in women as in men. Osteoporosis can also develop as a side effect of: Endocrine diseases, including hyperthyroidism and diabetes mellitus. Drugs, including glucocorticosteroids, alcohol, tobacco, dilantin, barbiturates and heparin. Various conditions, including being immobilized, chronic kidney failure, liver disease, chronic obstructive lung disease and conditions in which vitamins and minerals are not absorbed properly
When pain management doesn't help, what are other alternatives for back pain due to bulged discs and arthritis?	I usually advise people that options are nothing (leave it alone), exercise, medications, injections, surgery, or other (non-traditional like acupuncture, tai chi, or even cognitive behavioral therapy). Most people will do well with exercises and medication if needed. Surgery is usually done for so-called radicular or sciatic pains that don't get better with exercises, medications, or time. Injections may be considered for pain not relieved with time, exercise, or medication.
Is it possible to have full recovery from pancreatic cancer?	Yes, it is possible to have a full recovery from pancreatic cancer.
Can pancreatitis be a precursor for pancreatic cancer?	Yes, it can be. However, most cases of pancreatitis are unrelated to pancreatic cancer.
Will a person with Type 2 diabetes under control end up with the need for insulin?	As you may have read, Type 2 diabetes is a progressive disease. Will you require insulin? That all depends on individual factors that includes, among many other factors, weight, exercise, genetics, hormones and beta-cells, those cells that produce insulin in your pancreas. Research shows that managing your diabetes early in the disease process can have big payoffs in later years. Joining a support group for people with diabetes can be helpful in keeping you going in your health quest. Following up with your health care team regularly and keeping abreast on the new developments in diabetes management can also benefit you.
I don’t know anybody who has had these diseases. Why does my baby need these vaccines?	While a few of these diseases have virtually disappeared because of vaccination, outbreaks of measles and whooping cough still occur in the U.S. Even if some diseases do completely disappear in the U.S., they are common in other parts of the world and are just a plane ride away. If we stop vaccinating against these diseases, many more people will become infected. Vaccinating your child will keep him or her safe. 
How is lung cancer diagnosed?	The first step in diagnosing lung cancer is usually gathering images of the lungs using CT or CAT, MRI or PET scans. If the doctor is concerned about the images from these scans, the second step is taking a tissue sample from inside the lungs. This procedure is called a biopsy. If cancer is found in the tissue, genetic tests often help doctors determine how advanced the cancer is and the best treatment approach.
What exactly is a spine block injection? Will it work long-term for low back pain due to disc problems?	There are number of injections, and they basically are used to block the pain generators that are believed to be the cause of pain. These have been used for decades for pain control. Some need only one injection and some may need more than one to get adequate relief. There is no permanent solution that is consistent for these pain generators.
What are the symptoms of lung cancer?	Symptoms of lung cancer can include: A persistent cough. Changes in a chronic cough. Difficulty breathing. Coughing up blood. Chest pains. Shoulder or arm pain. Difficulty swallowing. Hoarseness. Unexplained weight loss. Some people who have lung cancer may not experience any symptoms until the disease is at an advanced stage.
Can numerous fibroids and an enlarged uterus cause bladder prolapse? Why does my gynecologist think my bladder bulging into my vaginal canal is a fibroid even after I was sent to a urologist for stress incontinence issues?	Typically, uterine fibroids would not cause bladder prolapse. However, they can certainly make the symptoms and/or the degree of prolapse worse, depending upon the size and location of the fibroid. It is also possible that a fibroid in the right location could actually cause the front wall of the vagina—where the bladder is—to protrude. An ob/gyn can often figure this out with a pelvic examination, but sometimes an ultrasound or MRI is needed.
Is it beneficial to your health to take Coenzyme Q10? If so, what are the benefits? Are there any side effects?	CoQ10 is important in the production of energy by your body. However, your body makes CoQ10 naturally. Therefore, most people do not need it. If you experience significant fatigue, take a statin drug, or have heart disease, CoQ10 may be helpful. I do not know of any side effects.
What medications are best for the treatment of asthma? What are their side effects?	Albuterol is usually the primary "rescue" or short-term medicine that is used to help acute asthma symptoms, such as coughing or wheezing. When a patient needs to use albuterol to relieve daytime symptoms more than twice per week, however, it usually reflects the need to use daily "controller" or anti-inflammatory medications. Many people are concerned about possible side effects of inhaled steroids, which are the largest group of "controller" medications available. When used in low- to medium-doses, however, inhaled steroids are very safe, even used on a daily basis for years. They are much safer than either multiple courses of oral steroids OR uncontrolled/undertreated asthma symptoms.
What are the risk factors for lung cancer?	A risk factor is something that increases your chances of getting a disease. Having a risk factor does not mean that you will definitely get a disease, only that you and your doctor should watch more carefully for warning signs. Some risk factors can be changed and some cannot. Risk factors for lung cancer may include: Smoking. Exposure to other people’s smoking (second-hand smoke). Exposure to radon gas, a natural gas, which is harmful in high levels and sometimes found in homes. Exposure to certain cancer-causing materials like asbestos and arsenic. Family history of lung cancer.
What is the difference between first-, second-, and third-degree burns?	First-degree burns are red and painful. They swell a little and turn white when you press on them. The skin over the burn may peel off in a day or two. This is the least severe type of burn, affecting only the outer layer of skin. Second-degree burns have blisters and are painful. They affect both the outer and thicker middle layer of skin. Third-degree burns cause damage to all layers of the skin. The burned skin looks white or charred. These burns may cause little or no pain if nerves are damaged.
What are the symptoms of pancreatic cancer?	There are no specific symptoms for early-stage pancreatic cancer, but if you notice unintentional weight loss, jaundice (yellowing of the skin) and stomach pain, we recommend that you see your primary care physician.
Why are vaccinations important?	Vaccinations protect your child against serious diseases by stimulating the immune system to create antibodies against certain bacteria or viruses.
Do patients have to sign a release for their own medical records?	Yes, absent a subpoena, any request for medical records requires a properly signed and dated HIPAA release form from the patient or from the appointed surrogate decision maker. In the case of a deceased patient, there should be evidence of the appointment of a surrogate.
Does daily exercise prolong the need for knee replacement?	Unfortunately, exercise does not prolong the need for knee replacement surgery. Regular exercise, however, does play a very important role in the management of arthritis. Because part of the arthritic process involves the formation of bone spurs and subsequent loss of motion, exercise is imperative to maintaining joint range of motion. Joint replacement surgery can reliably relieve pain, but it cannot reliably restore range of motion. The mantra is that the best determinant of post-operative range of motion is pre-operative range of motion.
I have been approved for a penile implant. I am looking for resources about the surgery: how the implant works, how it helps the penis lengthen from a flaccid state to fully erect. Also, how do I find how much experience a doctor has in this area?	While there is a lot of information online about prostheses, please know that a lot of this information is written and produced by the manufacturers of these devices, so take everything with a grain of salt. I think the best information on the devices comes from reading the instruction pamphlet for the device. It gives you the bare-bones facts about how the device works. If you have access to PubMed or other search engines for peer-reviewed medical/scientific literature, you can find research studies detailing outcomes (risks, durability, etc.) of these devices. A urologist with experience with these devices should be able to give you good information about this as well. We have excellent data on long-term outcomes for inflatable penile prostheses, since these devices have been available for decades. As far as your post-implant length goes, you can expect that your inflated (erect) length will be your stretched penile length. That's the length of your penis when you grasp the head and pull out on it. For most men, that's not the length they were when they were 18. There is one device on the market that expands in length (as well as girth) and may increase the length by a half-inch or so, but for the most part, I recommend that men expect to have their erection approximate to their stretched length post-op. I would encourage you to find a doctor who places at least one of these devices per month on average. A local urologist or men's health specialist (and even some primary care doctors) often know who in the area is experienced with implants.
Can you recommend any tools that will help me stay motivated to stay on my eating plan?	These are a few that I have found quite helpful for my patients: Continue to remind yourself of the benefits of reaching your goal. It may be looking good in those summer shorts or having more energy to keep up with your kids. Put up notes to remind yourself if necessary. Weigh yourself weekly and give yourself a NON-FOOD reward. It doesn’t have to be expensive. It could be giving yourself a candle-lit bubble bath or a back-rub from your spouse. Get creative. Continue to focus on health and wellness. Read books and articles that are motivating. Also, avoid environmental triggers that stir up your cravings such as watching food-related TV shows, meeting your friends at your favorite pastry shop, etc. Keep graphic records of your accomplishments. Watching that line on your weight graph go down or the line on your exercise graph go up can be quite motivating!
I know I overeat at meals, but I can't help it. If I limit my portions, I'm hungry an hour later. How can I avoid overeating and have better control of my appetite? (I'm 5'6" and weigh more than 220 pounds.)	Consume more whole foods and fiber. Make sure you have low-fat protein and a small amount of olive oil at the meal. If you cannot self-regulate portions, then measure and weigh everything. Come to the table with a measuring cup and spoon.
How do you determine whether your pain is back pain or actually a bad hip?	The symptoms of hip arthritis can superficially resemble spinal pain or sciatica. Hip joint pain is typically felt in the buttock, groin, or even in the front of the thigh descending to the knee. A careful physical examination by your physician can usually distinguish hip arthritis from a spinal cause. A plain X-ray of the hip is usually performed to confirm the presence of arthritis. In some persons with both spine and hip disease, an X-ray-guided hip injection is helpful to pinpoint the primary source of the pain.
Are vaccines safe?	Vaccines are among the safest medical products available, and scientists are working to make sure they are made even safer. Every vaccine undergoes extensive testing before being licensed, and vaccine safety continues to be monitored as long as a vaccine is in use. Most side effects from vaccination are minor, such as soreness where the injection was given or a low-grade fever. These side effects do not last long and are treatable. Serious reactions are very rare. The tiny risk of a serious reaction from a vaccination has to be weighed against the very real risk of getting a dangerous vaccine-preventable disease or suffering complications from it
What is arthritis?	The word arthritis literally means "joint inflammation." Arthritis refers to a group of more than 100 rheumatic diseases and other conditions that cause pain, stiffness, and swelling in joints. Rheumatoid arthritis is a disease that damages the lining surrounding our joints while also destroying our bones, tissue, and joints over time. Osteoarthritis is a progressive condition that slowly damages the cartilage surrounding the ends of bones and is common in the hip, knee, and spine.
Hearing aids are very expensive. How often will I have to be making an investment to replace or update them?	The typical life of hearing aids is usually about five to seven years. When you are first fitted with hearing aids, talk with your audiologist about choosing devices that will give you ‘room to grow’ in case your hearing loss progresses. Oftentimes, programming changes can be made to your current devices to accommodate changes in your hearing loss. Reasons that you may consider new hearing aids include: Outliving the life of the hearing aids. New technologies develop that offer better listening opportunities with new features. Progression in your hearing loss beyond the capabilities of the hearing aids. These days technology advances more quickly than hearing aids stop working. Talk with your audiologist to determine if there are features or accessories that can be added to your existing devices or if newer hearing aids would be most beneficial for you.
My 5-year-old daughter has asthma. What is the effect of using an asthma preventer long-term? I heard that using it for years might cause bone shrinkage. Is it true?	There is a lot of discussion by parents and physicians about the use of daily inhaled steroids (the "preventers" that you mentioned). When used at low dose, I feel there is robust data to support that they are very safe, even if used for years. There are good long-term studies that show there is not any significant effect on achieved height or growth velocity, and no effect on things that are associated with use of oral steroids, such as diabetes, hypertension, and immune suppression. At low dose, they won't cause bone shrinkage. Most pediatric asthma specialists choose to decrease doses of any inhaled steroids used about every three to six months if they achieve good symptom control.
I recently read that researchers believe certain foods might cure Alzheimer’s disease. Is this true? If so, which foods do this and how much would you have to consume to get the benefits?	Yes, there is research on this that is ongoing and potentially very exciting. There may be a link with inflammation and the buildup of amyloid plaque on the brain that increases the risk of Alzheimer’s disease. Diet may be a great way to help combat this. What should you eat? Plenty of fresh fruits and vegetables, 100% whole grains, extra virgin olive oil, nuts, and lean protein. As for the amount, I would say that eating three handfuls of vegetables per day and two handfuls of fruits twice a day is a great start. In addition, 1 to 2 tablespoons of extra virgin olive oil and two 3-ounce servings of fish, such as salmon, per week, would be wonderful. Good luck!
How do patients who have failure of their pituitary glands live without these hormones?	We have synthetic hormones that patients take either by mouth or injection to replace the missing hormones from the malfunctioning pituitary gland.
What is lung cancer?	Cancer is a disease in which the body’s cells grow out of control. Lung cancer starts in the lungs but can spread to other parts of the body. Lung cancer is often, but not always, caused by smoking or exposure to second-hand smoke. More people in the United States die from lung cancer than from any other type of cancer.